NBA Live 2004 is the 2004 installment of the NBA Live sports video game series. The game was developed by EA Canada and released in 2003. It is graphically similar to NCAA March Madness 2004 and has the same create-a-player models. It was the last EA game to include Michael Jordan. The cover shows Vince Carter as a member of the Toronto Raptors; in Spain it is Raul Lopez instead. This was also the first game to feature the Charlotte Bobcats, who would play their first season of basketball in the fall of 2004. Since the game's rosters were finalized before the Bobcats would host their expansion draft, the Bobcats' lineup consisted of players named after their specific positions; for example, the point guard was named "Point Guard".


== Gameplay ==


=== Modes ===
Season play allows the player to choose an NBA team to compete for the season trophy. Players can also choose how many games there are during the season. A custom player option also allows game players to create their own team of NBA players. There is also a Roster management where game players can buy and sell players from various teams in the NBA.
Dynasty is a gameplay mode that shares similarities with the traditional season mode but introduces unique features and objectives. In Dynasty Mode, teams compete for the Dynasty Trophy. Players earn points through gameplay, which can then be utilized for improvements like player skill levels. These points can be allocated to conduct individual or team training sessions, aiming to enhance the skill levels of the player's team. Additionally, points can be spent in the 'NBA store', where a variety of items such as shoes, jerseys, headbands, and socks can be purchased to customize the player characters. A key aspect of Dynasty Mode involves the drafting and development of new players, emphasizing long-term team building, and management strategies.
One on one allows two players to compete on either a gym or street court.
Training allows for practicing and improving court skills.


== Reception ==

The game received "favorable" reviews on all platforms according to video game review aggregator Metacritic. In Japan, Famitsu gave the PlayStation 2 version a score of three, eights and one, seven for a total of 31 out of 40.
During the AIAS' 7th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards, NBA Live 2004 received a nomination for "Outstanding Achievement in Licensed Soundtrack", which was ultimately awarded to SSX 3.


== References ==


== External links ==
NBA Live 2004 at MobyGames