WCW/nWo Revenge is a professional wrestling video game released in 1998 for the Nintendo 64 game console. It is the sequel to 1997's WCW vs. nWo: World Tour. Like its predecessor, Revenge features AKI's proprietary grappling system; as well as heavily improved graphics, a championship mode, and a large roster of wrestlers (real and fictional).
Revenge gained critical praise and tremendous commercial success. According to a 1999 article by IGN, Revenge was the best-selling wrestling game for the N64 console, and at the time, was the top selling third-party Nintendo game ever.
Revenge was the last AKI-developed WCW game for the Nintendo 64. The next AKI wrestling game released for the console, WWF WrestleMania 2000, sported THQ's newly acquired World Wrestling Federation (WWF) license.


== Background ==
The Revenge grappling system is part of what ensured the game's success and popularity. The system was simple to learn and allowed for a variety of moves to be performed depending on the character. The graphics were improved from World Tour, and many new features were introduced to expand the popular series.


== Reception ==

WCW/nWo Revenge surpassed the success of its predecessor, World Tour. Within a month, it became the highest selling console game in North America. Like its predecessor, Revenge also won "Console Fighting Game of the Year" by the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences at the 2nd Annual Interactive Achievement Awards, marking the second consecutive year an AKI/THQ title achieved the honor. It would quickly reach Player's Choice status and become heavily responsible for THQ's profits in late 1998 and 1999, eventually selling 1.88 million copies in the US and ranking substantially among the best-selling N64 games.
Next Generation rated it four stars out of five and commented that the full exhibitionist phenomenon of professional wrestling was better presented in Revenge than in other similar titles.
Revenge's main competition that year was WWF War Zone by Acclaim, based on WCW's rival promotion, the World Wrestling Federation (WWF). Due to War Zone being delayed into 1998 Bret Hart and "The British Bulldog" Davey Boy Smith make appearances in both titles (both men having departed from WWF in late 1997).
The game achieved critical favor for its numerous improvements on World Tour. Matt Casamassina of IGN commented that Revenge is better than World Tour in terms of gameplay, graphics, wrestler roster, atmosphere, controls and the ability to play the game with four players. In IGN's 2008 "History of Wrestling Games" article, Rus McLaughlin also commended Revenge for its expanded roster, authentic venues, and "style to burn".


== See also ==

List of licensed wrestling video games
Virtual Pro Wrestling


== References ==